JOSS paper (#253)
PyFstat/PyFstat: joss-paper/paper.md

    orcid: 0000-0001-7288-2231
    affiliation: "2"
  - name: Reinhard Prix
    orcid: 0000-0002-3789-6424
    affiliation: "3, 4"
affiliations:
  - name: Departament de Física, Institut d'Aplicacions Computacionals i de Codi Comunitari (IAC3), Universitat de les Illes Balears, and Institut d'Estudis Espacials de Catalunya (IEEC), Crta. Valldemossa km 7.5, E-07122 Palma, Spain
    index: 1
  - name: OzGrav, School of Physics & Astronomy, Monash University, Clayton 3800, Victoria, Australia
    index: 2
  - name: Max-Planck-Institut für Gravitationsphysik (Albert-Einstein-Institut), D-30167 Hannover, Germany
    index: 3
  - name: Leibniz Universität Hannover, D-30167 Hannover, Germany
    index: 4
date: 08 January 2021
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

Gravitational waves in the sensitivity band of ground-based detectors
can be emitted by a number of astrophysical sources,
including not only binary coalescences, but also individual spinning neutron stars.
The most promising signals from such sources,
although as of 2020 not yet detected,
are the long-lasting, quasi-monochromatic 'Continuous Waves' (CWs).
Many search methods have been developed and applied on

> LIGO [@TheLIGOScientific:2014jea]
> and Virgo [@TheVirgo:2014hva] data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Advanced LIGO [@TheLIGOScientific:2014jea]
and Advanced Virgo [@TheVirgo:2014hva] data.
```

Author: While the references cover only Advanced L/V, the sentence refers to the initial era as well. We could add initial-detector refs (:-1:) or maybe
```suggestion
(Advanced) LIGO [@TheLIGOScientific:2014jea]
and Virgo [@TheVirgo:2014hva] data.
```
?

Reviewer: Too much clutter I'd say: leave as is

See @Prix:2009oha, @Riles:2017evm, and @Sieniawska:2019hmd for reviews of the field.

> The `PyFstat` package provides a convenient interface

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `PyFstat` package provides tools
```
To avoid suggestion PyFstat is "only an interface"?

to perform a range of CW data analysis tasks.
It revolves around the $\mathcal{F}$-statistic,
first introduced by @Jaranowski:1998qm:
a matched-filter detection statistic for CW signals
described by a set of frequency evolution parameters
and maximized over amplitude parameters.

> It has been one of the standard methods for LIGO-Virgo CW searches for two decades.

Reviewer: Add reference to a search paper? O2 all-sky search?
@article{Pisarski:2019vxw,
    author = "Abbott, B. P. and others",
    collaboration = "LIGO Scientific, Virgo",
    title = "{All-sky search for continuous gravitational waves from isolated neutron stars using Advanced LIGO O2 data}",
    eprint = "1903.01901",
    archivePrefix = "arXiv",
    primaryClass = "astro-ph.HE",
    reportNumber = "LIGO-P1900012-v7",
    doi = "10.1103/PhysRevD.100.024004",
    journal = "Phys. Rev. D",
    volume = "100",
    number = "2",
    pages = "024004",
    year = "2019"
}

Author: Definitely not that one, as it uses the independent time-domain implementation. (Still F-stat, but confusing to point readers to.) E@H papers would be the most recent "close family members", but I'd say the Riles review reference earlier is sufficient?

`PyFstat` is built on top of established routines
in `LALSuite` [@lalsuite]

> but enables a flexible approach to designing new search strategies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
enabling a flexible approach to designing new search strategies.
```

Author: I'd like to keep putting emphasis on the contrast here: "yes it reuses existing stuff, BUT it enables something new". If that wasn't clear enough, it could be rewritten a bit more explicitly, though. How about we put back in the "interface" edited out before?
```suggestion
but through its more modern `python` interface
it enables a flexible approach to designing new search strategies.
```

Reviewer: Not my cup of tea, but definitely better than before. I'll let you press the commit button.

Classes for various search strategies and target signals
are contained in three main submodules:

- `core` : The basic wrappers to `LALSuite`'s $\mathcal{F}$-statistic algorithm.
End-users should rarely need to access these directly.
- `grid_based_searches` : Classes to search over regular parameter-space grids.

> - `mcmc_based_searches` : Classes to cover small parameter-space regions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `mcmc_based_searches` : Classes to cover promising parameter-space regions
```

<!-- around search targets or promising signal candidates from wider searches ('followup' use case) -->
through stochastic template placement with the `ptemcee` sampler [@Vousden:2015pte].

Besides standard CWs from isolated neutron stars, `PyFstat` can also be used

> for CWs from sources in binary systems (including the additional orbital parameters),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to search for CWs from sources in binary systems (including the additional orbital parameters),
```

for CWs with a discontinuity at a pulsar glitch,
and for CW-like long-duration transient signals e.g. from _after_ a pulsar glitch.
Specialized versions of both grid-based and MCMC-based search classes
are provided for these scenarios.
Both fully-coherent and semi-coherent searches
(where the data is split into several segments for efficiency)
are covered,
and an extension to the $\mathcal{F}$-statistic
that is more robust against single-detector noise artifacts
[@Keitel:2013wga]
is also supported.

> However, `PyFstat`'s grid-based searches do not compete with the sophisticated
> grid setups and semi-coherent algorithms implemented in various `LALSuite` programs.
> As discussed below, the main scientific use cases for `PyFstat` at the time of publication
> are for the MCMC exploration of small parameter-space regions
> and for the long-duration transient case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As discussed below, the main scientific use cases for `PyFstat` at the time of publication
are for the MCMC exploration of small parameter-space regions
and for the long-duration transient case.
However, `PyFstat`'s grid-based searches do not compete with the sophisticated
grid setups and semi-coherent algorithms implemented in various `LALSuite` programs.
```
I should massage this a little bit more, but do you think we should invert them?

Author: I think I prefer the original order as "end with an upper not a downer". But the `However` at the start could be dropped and instead somehow make it clearer from the `As discussed below` that the point is `However that's fine, our focus is different anyway`?

Reviewer: Now that I read it again, you are right it's too much of a downer.

What about getting rid of `However`? Also, we know `small != bad`, but we can use a nicer word?
```suggestion
Although `PyFstat`'s grid-based searches do not compete with the sophisticated
grid setups and semi-coherent algorithms implemented in various `LALSuite` programs
its main scientific use cases for  at the time of publication are for the MCMC exploration 
of interesting parameter-space regions and for the long-duration transient case, as 
discussed below.
```

Author: ```suggestion
While `PyFstat`'s grid-based searches do not compete with the sophisticated
grid setups and semi-coherent algorithms implemented in various `LALSuite` programs,
its main scientific use cases so far are for the MCMC exploration
of interesting parameter-space regions
and for the long-duration transient case,
as discussed below.
```

Author: No, that seems to focus the `as discussed below` on the transients. But since the "statement of need" is an expected default feature of a JOSS paper, we can just drop that comment:
 ```suggestion
While `PyFstat`'s grid-based searches do not compete with the sophisticated
grid setups and semi-coherent algorithms implemented in various `LALSuite` programs,
its main scientific use cases so far are for the MCMC exploration
of interesting parameter-space regions
and for the long-duration transient case.
```

Reviewer: :+1: Let's go with it

The source of `PyFstat` is hosted on [GitHub](https://github.com/PyFstat/PyFstat/).
The repository also contains an automated test suite
and a set of introductory example scripts.
Issues with the software can be submitted through GitHub
and pull requests are always welcome.
Documentation in html and pdf formats is available from [readthedocs.org](https://readthedocs.org/projects/pyfstat/)
and installation instructions can be found there
or in the [README](https://github.com/PyFstat/PyFstat/blob/master/README.md) file.

# Statement of need

The sensitivity of searches for CWs and long-duration transient GWs
is generally limited by computational resources,
as the required number of matched-filter templates increases steeply
for long observation times and wide parameter spaces.
The C-based `LALSuite` library [@lalsuite] contains many sophisticated search methods
with a long development history and high level of optimization,
but is not very accessible for researchers new to the field or for students;
nor is it very convenient for rapid development and integration with modern technologies
like GPUs or machine learning.
Hence, `PyFstat` serves a dual function of

> (i) making `LALSuite` CW functionality more easily accessible through a `Python` interface,

Reviewer 2: `Python` got broken (Pyth-on) in my version of the PDF, not sure there is a way to avoid that from happening?

Author: Thanks for spotting that. Since this goes through a markdown->tex conversion, I have no idea how to properly deal with it, and settled for the good old "delete a small superfluous word earlier in the paragraph" solution. ;)
